How do you organise $HOME?
##########################
:date: 2012-10-30 22:15
:author: Geert
:category: computing
:slug: how-to-organise-your-home-directory

Home directories often turn into spooky graveyards of random files,
temporary directories and `images of lolcats`_. It takes courage to
delete the mess, because there may be one or two important files hiding
amongst the pr0n. As a result, many scientists have grown afraid to run
:code:`ls ~` in public, fearing that the output of said command will expose
them as file-hoarding maniacs. (By the way, the fear of running :code:`ls ~`
should be called *domusindexophobia* in Latin.)

For years I have employed the popular strategy of sticking random files
on the desktop, and whenever it becomes a mess, create a folder called
"oldstuff" and move everything into it. The strength of this strategy is
that it can be repeated indefinitely (oldstuff2, oldstuff3,
oldstuff4...), the weakness is that you remain a file-hoarding,
domusindexophobic maniac.

In the past few months I decided to adopted a more sensible strategy.
From henceforth, my home directory shall never contain more than 7
(non-hidden) directories:

-  **~/tmp**: all downloads and unimportant files go here; may be
   emptied without notice;
-  **~/bin**: locally installed software, i.e. :code:`./configure
   --prefix=~/bin/foo`;
-  **~/dev**: source code trees for programming projects
   (sub-directories are GitHub repositories);
-  **~/proj**: various non-programming projects;
-  **~/doc**: subdirectories for receipts, boarding passes, papers,
   books, etc.;
-  **~/lts**: things to archive forever ("Long Term Storage"); e.g.
   photos and science data (with README files);
-  **~/msc**: a last resort for things which don't fit elsewhere.

I employ different backup strategies for each folder. For example, parts
of ~/lts sit on an external network drive, while much of ~/doc sits on
DropBox and most of ~/dev sits on GitHub.

Is this a Sensible Approach™? What does your nest look like?

.. _images of lolcats: http://4.bp.blogspot.com/-K3vWjzXLsKM/TzDGLdv6GqI/AAAAAAAAB_M/EJUwGAP3sME/s1600/funny-pictures-cat-threatens-to-edit-your-face.jpg
