Comet PanSTARRS attracts 2x more men than women?
################################################
:date: 2013-03-20 18:41
:author: Geert
:category: comets
:slug: comet-panstarrs-attracts-2x-more-men-than-women

Two weeks ago, I `posted an animation`_ on YouTube showing where Comet
PanSTARRS would be visible. The video attracted more than 15 000 hits,
and **although this is not a proper statistical analysis**, I would like
to draw attention to an interesting result in the demographic analytics
provided by YouTube: 75% of the viewers were male.

.. figure:: |filename|/images/20130320-panstarrs-youtube.png
   :alt: statistics
   :target: |filename|/images/20130320-panstarrs-youtube.png

   YouTube demographic statistics for the animation of comet PanSTARRS's visibility.


Although the numbers are only based on the ~20% of viewers which were
logged into a YouTube account while watching, statistics like these may
reveal broad trends about the public interest in astronomy. If we were
to assume that all people interested in astronomy are equally likely to
have watched the animation, and if in addition we assume that these
people are all equally likely to have a YouTube account regardless of
their age/gender, then one might conclude that (middle-aged) men are
twice more likely to seek for comet information than women.
Interestingly, this is broadly consistent with the (unfortunate) trend
of large male majorities in astronomy clubs and `university
departments`_.

There is no doubt that the above assumptions are wrong to some degree,
and that the YouTube statistics are hence biased. It is not clear how
severe the bias is however. I tried Googling for demographic statistics
of YouTube users in general, but could not find consistent information.
(Does anyone know a reliable source? Are 75% of YouTube users male
anyway?!)

If the biases can be accounted for using a proper statistical analysis,
then the analytics offered by science-themed YouTube videos would
provide a way to measure the public interest as a function of age,
gender and topic.

.. _posted an animation: |filename|2013-03-15-panstarrs.rst
.. _|image1|: http://barentsen.files.wordpress.com/2013/03/20130320-panstarrs-youtube.png
.. _university departments: http://womeninastronomy.blogspot.co.uk/2012/11/where-are-women-astronomy-professors.html
